Add RTCP overhead considerations for streams/datagrams (#227)
mengelbart/rtp-over-quic-draft: draft-ietf-avtcore-rtp-over-quic.md

Because QUIC provides a capability to migrate connections for various reasons, including recovering from a path failure ({{Section 9 of !RFC9000}}), when a QUIC connection migrates, a RoQ sender has the opportunity to revisit decisions about which RTP packets are encapsulated in QUIC streams, and which RTP packets are encapsulated in QUIC DATAGRAMs. Again, RoQ receivers need to be prepared for this eventuality.

> ## RTCP Considerations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## RTCP Considerations {#RTCP-considerations}
```

> RTCP was originally defined to be used with UDP, which implies (1) that
> transmission timing is largely under the control of the application (limited
> buffering inside the stack) and (2) that the overhead, *avg_rtcp_size*, used to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RTCP was originally defined to be used with UDP, which implies (1) 
the only buffering present would be at the interface level, so that transmission timing is largely under the control of the application, and (2) that the overhead, *avg_rtcp_size*, used to
```

compute the RTCP transmission interval could be deterministically computed by
adding the IP asnd UDP headers. Both change when carrying RTCP over QUIC and
they change in different ways when using QUIC streams vs. QUIC datagrams.

### RTCP over QUIC datagrams {#rtcp-over-datagrams}

When sending RTCP packets in QUIC datagrams this implies that a packet may not
be immediately transmitted as it is subject to queuing and multiplexing with RTP

> packets and subject to congestion control. This means that a sending timestamp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packets and subject to QUIC congestion control. This means that a sending timestamp
```

added to an RTCP packet, e.g., in an SR packet, may differ in unforeseeable ways
from the actual time when the packet gets sent into the network while these are
usually fairly close to each other for RTP-over-UDP. Effectively, we have a
application sending timestamp *t_a* and the network transmission timestamp
*t_n*. Applications just have to be aware that RTCP does not measure the network

> level RTT but rather the application layer RTT.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what we're telling the application (developer) here. If I thought I had *t_n*, but actually had *t_a*, my RTT estimates are going to be more conservative, aren't they? If I managed to use *t_n* for RTT estimation, doesn't that mean I'm more likely to overshoot what the receiver can accept?

> level RTT but rather the application layer RTT.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how this is different from RT(C)P over UDP. Isn't this last sentence also true for that?

Reviewer 2: Well, in most cases when running RTP/RTCP directly over UDP the only extra latency is the time it takes from having entered the application layer timestamp until an IP/UDP packet with the payload can be created. That is normally quite short when one is running directly on UDP sockets.

Moreover, the true overhead per RTCP packet cannot easily be determined: this is
because, in addition to adding the IP and UDP headers, the QUIC (short) header
and the QUIC datagram frame header are to be considered but their sizes vary and
it is unknown which other frames may be sent along in the same UDP packet. Any
lower bound that can be determined could be affected by the version of QUIC
being used.

> It is thus suggested that applications do _not_ attempt to include lower layer
> headers but only work with the net data rate of the codec including the RTP
> headers and of the RTCP packets, both excluding QUIC, UDP, and IP header
> overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is thus suggested that application developers recognize that per-RTCP packet overhead will always be an estimate, and include IP, UDP, QUIC, and DATAGRAM header sizes as a conservative heuristic.
```
Stolen from @gloinul - thank you, Magnus!

Author: I think this should also include QUIC STREAM frames.

Author: oh, no, sorry, STREAMs are covered below...

> **Editor’s Note:** For compatibility with the computation of RTP-over-UDP
> implementations, one could consider adding just the UDP and IP headers.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
(This is just removing the Editor's Note)

> ### RTCP over QUIC streams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### RTCP over QUIC streams {#rtcp-over-streams}
```

The above considerations from {{rtcp-over-datagrams}} get even more complex when
transmitting RTCP reliably over QUIC streams: it is unknown if (and how many)
retransmissions occurred.

For RTT computations, again, this means that the application must consider that
it observes the application layer RTT including retransmissions, where
retransmissions also contribute to the observed jitter.

For overhead computation, retransmissions are not explicitly considered nor is
the multiplexing with other streams.

> To keep the complexity under control, it is again recommended to _not_ attempt
> to include the unknown lower layer overhead and only use the data rates and
> packet sizes visible at the application (=RTP/RTCP) layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep the complexity under control, it is again suggested that application developers recognize that per-RTCP packet overhead will always be an estimate, and these estimates should include plausible values for IP, UDP, QUIC, and QUIC STREAM frame header sizes. 
```
I'm adapting a @gloinul comment about datagrams - please let me know if I got this wrong.

> 
> > **Editor’s note:** previous note also applies here but, due to
> > retransmissions, overhead is even less predictable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
This is just removing the Editor's note, which refers to a previous Editor's note that no longer exists.

### Mixed operations

Applications may, in principle, mix sending RTP and RTCP via streams and as
datagrams. Doing so has unforeseeable implications on timing and reordering and
overhead.

> Therefore, applications SHOULD use the same QUIC primitives for both RTP and
> RTCP. If an application uses both streams and datagrams to selectively obtain
> reliable transmission for some RTP packets but not for others, it SHOULD also
> knowingly choose which RTT observations it is interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the same QUIC primitives for both RTP and
RTCP will be safer than mixing QUIC primitives - for example, using QUIC streams to carry RTP media payloads and QUIC DATAGRAMs to carry RTCP, or vice versa. If an application uses both streams and datagrams to selectively obtain
reliable transmission for some RTP media payloads but not for others, it is strongly suggested that the application developer
knowingly choose which RTT observations they are interested in, while remaining aware of the advice included in {{RTCP-considerations}}
```
